---
title: "Introduction to R"
date: 2020-07-31
tags: [data wrangling, data science, messy data]
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
header:
  image: "/images/mountain-3.jpg"
  caption: "Photo credit: [**Unsplash.com**](https://unsplash.com)"
excerpt: "A brief introduction on working with R in an interactive environment: RStudio"
---
## R is a programming language.

It was developed in the late 1990's. R was developed to make it easy for anyone to interact with their data through simple commands. It is what we call an *__interpreted language__* meaning we write a command and the machine immediately answers it.

### Download and Installation

Tha main resource for R material is called the [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/) (Comprehensive R Archive Network).

No proprietary software is needed, we can run it on Windows, Linux and Mac.
- The procedure of downloading and installing the software is depended on which OS

### RStudio

Working with R has never been easier than using Rstudio. I would recommend downloading it and familiarizing yourself with the interface.
- It is free and you can download versions for an operating system.[RStudio](https://rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/)
ATTN: <mark> RStudio need R to be already installed on your computer to work. </mark>
- You can choose to customize your RStudio to suit your need.[Customization](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/articles/200549016-Customizing-RStudio)

### Quick Walkthrough of some fundamentals

1. Data Import into R
2. Heterogeneous data: list and data.frame
3. Programming with data in R
4. Preprocessing data with R
5. Plotting in R
6. Simple Statistics functions in R

### 1. Data Import into R

Careful data preparation is needed before importing data.<br/>

__Reading in a file from excel in csv format__
- Let's start with a file created in excel and exported as csv(comma separated variables). A csv file is also a text file, with commas separating all the values. 
- Some of the importing errors we can come across are having the column names with spaces or strange characters.
- The row.names and col.names identifiers can have duplicates, this is troublesome when .<br/>
- We can use the `read.csv` which supposes that the separator is the comma (,) character. 
- Files ending in `.xls` and `.xlsx` can be difficult to read because they can contain multiple spreadsheets. The R package `readxl` comes handy.

`readxl` creates a different type of output, similar to a data.frame, called a tibble. We can reverse this and use the classical data.frame.
```r
install.packages("readxl")
library(readxl)
filename <- read_excel("path/of/the/file.xlsx")
filename.df <- as.data.frame(filename)
```
INCLUDE r-dataimport-cheatsheet 

### 2. Heterogeneous data: list and data.frame

__list__ : A completely hetergenous set of objects of different types and different sizes can be combines into a list.
- a `list()` creates an ordered collection of components.

```{r}
A <- matrix( c(4,2,0,3,1,7,2,8,4,5), nrow = 2, ncol = 5)
File <- list(name = "Filename", byDate = 12220, Amatrix = A)
File
```

__data.frame__ : A data.frame is a list that contains many variables, they can be considered to be in the columns of a table. 
- Using the `str(filename)` gives the information of the data we reference.
- Using the `summary(filename)` gives a statistical summary of the differnt columns from the dataset.

### 3. Programming in R

INCLUDE r-programming-cheatsheet

### 4. Preprocessing data in R

Careful data preprocessing is necessary at the beginning of any data exploration exercise.
- Missing data
- Replace just the missing values
- Data imputation
- Outlier detection
- Grouping Data
- Filtering data
- Sequence of Transformations
- Making new variables
INCLUDE r-datawrangling-cheatsheet

### 5. Plotting in R
- Plotting in base R
- Plots
    - boxplot
    - hist
    - barplot

### 6. Statistic functions in R

We'll learn how to simulate data with R using random number generators and how to use some of the most useful statistical functions.
- Using the apply() function
- A ggpot histogram
- Eg, - computing probability by Monte Carlo
- Regression
- Testing in R: 
    - t.test
    - chisq.test
INCLUDE r-ggplot2-cheatsheet


```python

```
