---
title: "Descriptive Statistics"
date: 2020-07-31
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
header:
  image: "/images/mountain-image-3.jpg"
  caption: "Photo credit: [**Unsplash.com**](https://unsplash.com)"
excerpt: "Basic beginner level statistics"
---
## Descriptive Statistics

The two most important functions of descriptive statistics are:
- Communicating information
- Support reasoning about the data. 

When exploring data of large size, it becomes essential to use summaries.

### Graphical Summaries
- It is best to use a graphical summary to communicate information, because people prefer to look at pictures rather than at numbers.<br/>
- There are many ways to visualize data. The nature of the data and the goal of visualization determines which method to choose.

#### Pie chart and dot plot:
The dot plot makes it easier to compare frequencies of various categories, while the pie chart allows to easily eyeball what fraction of the total a category responds to.
INSERT IMAGES

#### Bar Graph:
When the data are quantitative(numbers), they should be put on a number line. This is because the ordering and the distance between the numbers convey information.
INSERT IMAGE

#### Histogram:
The histogram allows to use blocks with different widths.<br/>
__KEY POINT__: The areas of the blocks are proportional to frequency.

The percentage falling into a block can be figured without a vertical scale since the total area equals 100%.
- It is helpful to have a vertical scale (density scale). Its unit is % per unit.
INSERT IMAGE
<br/>
The histogram gives two kinds of information about the data:
1. __Density__(crowding): The height of the bar tells how many subjects there are for one unit on the horizontal scale.<br/>
2. __Percentaged__(relative frequencies): They are given by, area = height x width.

#### Boxplot:
The boxplot conveys less information than a histogram, but it takes up less space so is well suited to compare several dataset.<br/>
INSERT IMAGE
The boxplot depicts five key number of the data:
1. sample minimum (smallest observation)
2. lower quartile (first quartile)
3. median (middle value)
4. upper quartile (third quartile)
5. sample maximum (largest observation)

#### Scatterplot:
The scatterplot is used to depic data that come as pairs. The scatterplot visualizes the relationship between the two variables.
INSERT IMAGE

### Providing context is important
Statistical analyses typically compare the observed data to a reference. Therefore, context is essential for graphical integrity.
> One way to provide context is by using small multiples, the compact design of the boxplot makes it a well suited choice.

#### Pitfalls when visualizing data
Sophistaced software makes it tempting to produce shows but poor visual.
NEED TO ADD Context.

#### Numerical summary measures
For summerizing data with one number, we can use the mean( = average) or the median.The median is the number that is larger than half the data and smaller than the other half.
INSERT MEDIAN IMAGE.
> Mean and median are the same when the histogram is symmetric.
> When observing the histogram, if is it skeweed to the right, then the mean can be much larger than the median. So, if the histogram is very skeweed, then use the median.

#### Standard deviation
The more commonly used measure of spread is the standard deviation.
$$ s = \sqrt{\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n(x_i - x\hat)^2} $$ </br> <div align = "center"> or </div> $$ \sqrt{\frac{1}{n-1}\sum_{i=1}^n(x_i =x\hat)^2} $$
</br>
> The large number $ x\hat$ and $ s $ are often used to summarize data. Both are sensitive to a few large or small data.
> If there is a concern, we can use the median and the interquartile range.



